Initial drafts of .NET Aspire CLI docs (#3905)
dotnet/docs-aspire: docs/cli/overview.md

| [`aspire publish`](#publish-aspire-applications-preview)   | Preview | Generates deployment artifacts for an Aspire apphost project.             |

<!-- These commands aren't used yet

| [`aspire config`](#configure-aspire-environment)         | Stable  | Configures the Aspire environment.                                        |
| `aspire init`                                            | Future  | ... |

-->

## Create projects

The `aspire new` command is an interactive-first CLI experience, and is used to create one or more Aspire projects. As part of creating a project, Azure CLI ensures that the latest Aspire project templates are installed into the `dotnet` system.

<!-- Add asciinema here -->

Use the `aspire new` command to create an Aspire project from a list of templates. Once a template is selected, the name of the project is set, and the output folder is chosen, `aspire` downloads the latest templates and generates one or more projects.

While command line parameters can be used to automate the creation of an Aspire project, the Aspire CLI is an interactive-first experience.

> ## Run the apphost project

Reviewer: Do you like "Aspire run" here better?

> The `aspire run` command runs the apphost project in development mode, which configures the Aspire environment, builds the apphost, launches the web dashboard, and displays a terminal-based dashboard. This is similar to running the apphost project in your IDE of choice, however, a terminal dashboard is also visible.

Reviewer: I know Maddy and Fowler, really like "AppHost", but I'm still not convinced it's correct. It's an overload phrase, are we talking about the concept of the orchestrator, the project itself, the project template, the AppHost.cs file? There are way too many things that this could be referring to, and it's becoming ambiguous. I've historically tried to combat that by saying:

- AppHost project: when talking about the project (modified template).
- AppHost template: when talking about the template (starting point).
- AppHost.cs: when talking about the entry point.
- App host: when talking about it conceptually.

This isn't perfect, but one thing we haven't done is call it `apphost`.

<!-- Add asciinema here -->

## Publish Aspire applications (preview)

The `aspire publish` command publishes resources, serializing data into JSON format. When this command is run, Aspire invokes registered <xref:Aspire.Hosting.ApplicationModel.PublishingCallbackAnnotation> annotations for resources. These annotations serialize a resource so that it can be consumed by deployment tools.

## Deploy Aspire applications (preview)

The `aspire deploy` command is similar to `aspire publish`, except that in addition to serializing resources, it also deploys resources that have registered a `DeployingCallbackAnnotation` annotation.

> [!TIP]
> Consider this a good way to deploy your Aspire solution to a staging area for testing.

## Run commands in resource context (preview)

> The `aspire exec` command runs commands in the context of a specific Aspire resource, inheriting that resource's configuration including environment variables, connection strings, and working directory. This is particularly useful for scenarios like running Entity Framework migrations where you need to run commands with the same configuration as your application. For example, you can run `aspire exec --resource api -- dotnet ef migrations add Init` to run Entity Framework commands with the proper database connection strings automatically configured.

Reviewer: Does it make sense to have links to the command docs under each section that talks through it conceptually?

---
title: .NET Aspire CLI Overview and Commands
description: Learn .NET Aspire CLI commands for creating projects, running an app host, and adding integrations. Get started with command-line tools to build and manage distributed applications efficiently.
ms.date: 06/26/2025
ms.topic: overview
ms.custom:
  - ai-gen-docs-bap
  - ai-gen-title
  - ai-seo-date:06/26/2025
  - ai-gen-description
---

# .NET Aspire CLI Overview

// TODO: More selling of why you want to use this instead of the .NET CLI you're probably already familiar with.

The .NET Aspire CLI (`aspire` command) is a .NET global tool that provides command-line functionality to create, manage, run, and publish Aspire projects. Use the .NET Aspire CLI to streamline development workflows for distributed applications.

- [Install .NET Aspire CLI](install.md)

## Create projects

> The `aspire new` command creates one or more Aspire projects  that the Aspire CLI tool installs the latest Aspire project templates into the `dotnet` system.

Reviewer: This sentence seems a bit off, almost like two separate thoughts.

```suggestion
The `aspire new` command creates one or more Aspire projects that the Aspire CLI tool installs the latest Aspire project templates into the `dotnet` system.
```

> Use the `aspire new` command to create an Aspire project from a list of templates. Once a template is selected, the name of the project is set, and the output folder is chosen, `aspire` downloads the latest templates and generates one or more projects.

Reviewer: Should we explicitly state that it's an interactive-first CLI experience?

## Run the app host project

> // TODO: This also checks certs, and does it do anything else? What else should we point out?

Reviewer: In order (sourced from [here](https://github.com/dotnet/aspire/blob/main/src/Aspire.Cli/Commands/RunCommand.cs#L60)):

- Locates app host project.
- Checks certificates.
- Trusts certificates.
- Builds app host project.
- Verifies app host compatibility.
- Runs the app host:
  - Displays link to launched dashboard.
  - Displays table of resources with endpoints.

The `aspire run` command runs the app host project in development mode, which launches the dashboard and any projects configured with the app host. This is similar to running the app host project in your IDE of choice, however, a terminal dashboard is also visible. For example:

> ```aspire

Reviewer: Does this work?

```suggestion
```Aspire CLI
```

Author: Tried this out. Looks like it cuts off at the first space. So it just says `Aspire` which isn't that bad actually...

Dashboard:
📈  Direct: https://localhost:17077/login?t=64ebc6d760ab2c48df93607fd431cf0a

╭─────────────┬─────────┬─────────┬────────────────────────╮
│ Resource    │ Type    │ State   │ Endpoint(s)            │
├─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼────────────────────────┤
│ apiservice  │ Project │ Running │ https://localhost:7422 │
│             │         │         │ http://localhost:5327  │
│ webfrontend │ Project │ Running │ https://localhost:7241 │
│             │         │         │ http://localhost:5185  │
╰─────────────┴─────────┴─────────┴────────────────────────╯
Press CTRL-C to stop the app host and exit.
```

## Add integrations

> The `aspire add` command is an easy way to add integration packages to your app host. Use this as an alternative to a NuGet search through your IDE. You can run `aspire add <name|id>` if you know the name or NuGet ID of the integration package, If you omit a name or ID, the tool provides a list of packages to choose from. If you provide a partial name or ID, the tool filters the list of packages with items that match the provided value.

Reviewer: It's currently limited to official packages I believe, and only hosting integrations, packages in the AppHost project.

---
title: .NET Aspire CLI Overview and Commands
description: Learn about the Aspire CLI commands for creating projects, running an app host, and adding integrations. Get started with command-line tools to build and manage distributed applications efficiently.
ms.date: 06/26/2025
ms.topic: overview
ms.custom:
  - ai-gen-docs-bap
  - ai-gen-title
  - ai-seo-date:06/26/2025
  - ai-gen-description
---

# Aspire CLI Overview

> The Aspire CLI (`aspire` command) is a cross-platform tool that provides command-line functionality to create, manage, run, and publish polyglot Aspire projects. Use the Aspire CLI to streamline development workflows and coordinate services for distributed applications.

Reviewer 2: I think we can probably remove polyglot?

When `aspire run` starts, it searches the current directory for an AppHost project. If a project isn't found, the sub directories are searched until one is found. If no AppHost project is found, Aspire stops. Once a project is found, Aspire CLI takes the following steps:

- Installs or verifies that Aspire's local hosting certificates are installed and trusted.
- Builds the AppHost project.
- Starts the app host and its resources.
- Starts the dashboard.

The following snippet is an example of the output displayed by the `aspire run` command:

```Aspire CLI
Dashboard:  https://localhost:17178/login?t=17f974bf68e390b0d4548af8d7e38b65                                         
                                                                                                                    
    Logs:  /home/vscode/.aspire/cli/logs/apphost-1295-2025-07-14-18-16-13.log                                       
                                                              
Endpoints:  webfrontend has endpoint https://localhost:7294   
            webfrontend has endpoint http://localhost:5131   
            apiservice has endpoint https://localhost:7531   

>             apiservice has endpoint http://localhost:5573   

Reviewer 2: This list of endpoints will not be shown if you aren't running in a Devcontainer/Codespace (may want to mention that).

<!-- Add asciinema here -->

## Publish Aspire applications (preview)

[_Command reference: `aspire publish`_](../cli-reference/aspire-publish.md)

The `aspire publish` command publishes resources by serializing them to disk. When this command is run, Aspire invokes registered <xref:Aspire.Hosting.ApplicationModel.PublishingCallbackAnnotation> resource annotations, in the order they're declared. These annotations serialize a resource so that it can be consumed by deployment tools.

Some integrations automatically register a `PublishingCallbackAnnotation` for you, for example:

- <xref:Aspire.Hosting.Azure.AzureEnvironmentResource> generates Bicep assets.
- <xref:Aspire.Hosting.Docker.DockerComposeEnvironmentResource> generates docker-compose yaml.

> - <xref:Aspire.Hosting.Kubernetes.KubernetesEnvironmentResource> generates Kubernetes Helm charts.

Reviewer: Can you provide those code examples? Happy to add them, but need to ensure we're doing it correctly.

---
title: .NET Aspire CLI Overview and Commands

> description: Learn .NET Aspire CLI commands for creating projects, running an app host, and adding integrations. Get started with command-line tools to build and manage distributed applications efficiently.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Learn about the Aspire CLI commands for creating projects, running an app host, and adding integrations. Get started with command-line tools to build and manage distributed applications efficiently.
```

ms.date: 06/26/2025
ms.topic: overview
ms.custom:
  - ai-gen-docs-bap
  - ai-gen-title
  - ai-seo-date:06/26/2025
  - ai-gen-description
---

> # .NET Aspire CLI Overview

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Aspire CLI Overview
```

The Aspire CLI (`aspire` command) is a cross-platform tool that provides command-line functionality to create, manage, run, and publish polyglot Aspire projects. Use the Aspire CLI to streamline development workflows and coordinate services for distributed applications.

The Aspire CLI is an interactive-first experience.

> - [Install .NET Aspire CLI.](install.md)

Reviewer: Could we use the fancy green checkbox list style here?

Author: Gross

- [`aspire` command reference.](../cli-reference/aspire.md)

## Use templates

[_Command reference: `aspire new`_](../cli-reference/aspire-new.md)

The `aspire new` command is an interactive-first CLI experience, and is used to create one or more Aspire projects. As part of creating a project, Azure CLI ensures that the latest Aspire project templates are installed into the `dotnet` system.

> <!-- Add asciinema here -->

Reviewer: I wish, not on Learn. 🤣

Some integrations automatically register a `PublishingCallbackAnnotation` for you, for example:

- <xref:Aspire.Hosting.Azure.AzureEnvironmentResource> generates Bicep assets.
- <xref:Aspire.Hosting.Docker.DockerComposeEnvironmentResource> generates docker-compose yaml.
- <xref:Aspire.Hosting.Kubernetes.KubernetesEnvironmentResource> generates Kubernetes Helm charts.

## Deploy Aspire applications (preview)

[_Command reference: `aspire deploy`_](../cli-reference/aspire-deploy.md)

The `aspire deploy` command is similar to `aspire publish`. After Aspire has invoked the publishing annotations to serialize resources to disk, it invokes `DeployingCallbackAnnotation` resource annotations, in the order they're declared.

As of Aspire 9.4, Aspire doesn't include any default deployment annotations for its resources, you must use the `DeployingCallbackAnnotation` to build your own.

> [!TIP]

> > Consider this a good way to deploy your Aspire solution to a staging area for testing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Consider this a good way to deploy your Aspire solution to a staging or testing environment.
```
